[FLINK-37310][doc] SQL connector for keyed savepoint data documentation (#26154)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/libs/state_processor_api.md

# State Processor API

> Apache Flink's State Processor API provides powerful functionality to reading, writing, and modifying savepoints and checkpoints using Flink’s [DataStream API]({{< ref "#datastream-api" >}}) and [Table API]({{< ref "#table-api" >}}) under `BATCH` execution.

Reviewer: nit: powerful functionality to -> powerful functionality for

Author: This is not added by me but let's make it better so changed.

        OperatorIdentifier.forUid("new-uid"))
    ...
```

## Table API

### Getting started

> Before you interrogate state using the table API, make sure to review our [Flink SQL](../development/sql.md) guidelines.

Reviewer 2: Seems invalid link?
```suggestion
Before you interrogate state using the table API, make sure to review our [Flink SQL](({{< ref "docs/dev/table/overview" >}})) guidelines.
```
OR
```suggestion
Before you interrogate state using the table API, make sure to review our [Flink SQL](({{< ref "docs/dev/table/sql/overview" >}})) guidelines.
```

  MyListState ARRAY<INTEGER>,
  MyMapState MAP<INTEGER, INTEGER>,
  PRIMARY KEY (k) NOT ENFORCED
) WITH (
  'connector' = 'savepoint',
  'state.backend.type' = 'rocksdb',
  'state.path' = '/root/dir/of/checkpoint-data/chk-1',
  'operator.uid' = 'my-uid'
);
```

### Connector options

#### General options
| Option             | Required | Default | Type                                          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|--------------------|----------|---------|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| connector          | required | (none)  | String                                        | Specify what connector to use, here should be 'state'.                                                                                                                                            |

> | state.backend.type | required | (none)  | Enum Possible values: hashmap, rocksdb, forst | Defines the state backend which must be used for state reading. This must match with the value which was defined in Flink job which created the savepoint or checkpoint.                          |

Reviewer 2: IIUC, `forst` will not be supported if https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/26134/files#diff-c6d7f03b3d79d772c126e131a60d031f19a8fb3ac0a68d6cda81dfd2d216ff7cR388 is merged, right?

Author: Yeah, practically the code can eat the value but will blow up with exception. In short the possible values and support now here differs. If you think we can just remove it for now. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: I thought we can just remove it, the normal users are not able to distinguish the possible values and supported ones.

Author: Removed.

| state.path         | required | (none)  | String                                        | Defines the state path which must be used for state reading. All file system that are supported by Flink can be used here.                                                                        |
| operator.uid       | optional | (none)  | String                                        | Defines the operator UID which must be used for state reading (can't be used together with `operator.uid.hash`).                                                                                  |

> | operator.uid.hash  | optional | (none)  | String                                        | Defines the operator UID hash which must be used for state reading (can't be used together with `operator.uid`).                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: Additional note that either `operator.uid` or `operator.uid.hash` must be specified?

Author: Added.

        OperatorIdentifier.forUid("new-uid"))
    ...
```

## Table API

### Getting started

> Before getting started with state SQL connector, make sure to review our [Flink SQL](../development/sql.md) guidelines.

Reviewer: we refer to "state SQL connector" before mentioning it . Maybe we could make this more general. Before you interrogate state using the table API, make sure to ....

> IMPORTANT NOTE: State Table API is now only supports keyed state.

Reviewer: nit: remove `is now`

Author: Removed.

### Keyed State

> [Keyed state]({{< ref "docs/dev/datastream/fault-tolerance/state" >}}#keyed-state), or partitioned state, is any state that is partitioned relative to a key.

Reviewer: nit: `or partitioned state` -> also known as `partitioned state`

Author: Changed.

> The SQL connector allows users to read arbitrary columns as ValueState and complex state types such as ListState, MapState.

Author: Link to where? The whole doc has no ValueState chapter.

This means if an operator contains a stateful process function such as:
```java
eventStream
  .keyBy(e -> (Integer)e.key)
  .process(new StatefulFunction())
  .uid("my-uid");

...

public class Account {
    private Integer id;
    public Double amount;

    public Integer geId() {
        return id;
    }

    public void setId(Integer id) {
        this.id = id;
    }
}

public class StatefulFunction extends KeyedProcessFunction<Integer, Integer, Void> {
  private ValueState<Integer> myValueState;
  private ValueState<Account> myAccountValueState;
  private ListState<Integer> myListState;
  private MapState<Integer, Integer> myMapState;

  @Override
  public void open(OpenContext openContext) {
    myValueState = getRuntimeContext().getState(new ValueStateDescriptor<>("MyValueState", Integer.class));
    myAccountValueState = getRuntimeContext().getState(new ValueStateDescriptor<>("MyAccountValueState", Account.class));
    myValueState = getRuntimeContext().getListState(new ListStateDescriptor<>("MyListState", Integer.class));
    myMapState = getRuntimeContext().getMapState(new MapStateDescriptor<>("MyMapState", Integer.class, Integer.class));
  }
  ...
}
```

> Then it can read by using the following SQL statement:

Reviewer: nit: the create table is not reading it. Maybe change this to "Then it can read by querying a table created using the following SQL statement"

Author: Changed.

```SQL
CREATE TABLE state_table (
  k INTEGER,
  MyValueState INTEGER,
  MyAccountValueState ROW<id INTEGER, amount DOUBLE>,
  MyListState ARRAY<INTEGER>,
  MyMapState MAP<INTEGER, INTEGER>,
  PRIMARY KEY (k) NOT ENFORCED
) WITH (
  'connector' = 'savepoint',
  'state.backend.type' = 'rocksdb',
  'state.path' = '/root/dir/of/checkpoint-data/chk-1',
  'operator.uid' = 'my-uid'
);
```

### Connector options

#### General options
| Option             | Required | Default | Type                                          | Description |
|--------------------|----------|---------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------|
| connector          | required | (none)  | String                                        | Specify what connector to use, here should be 'state'. |

> | state.backend.type | required | (none)  | Enum Possible values: hashmap, rocksdb, forst | Defines the state backend which must be used for state reading. This must match with the value which was defined in Flink job which created the savepoint or checkpoint. |

Reviewer: Is state.backend.type required. Can we not determine this dynamically from the state  format in the statepath?

Author: Sometimes yes, but since not all the time this config must exist.

| state.path         | required | (none)  | String                                        | Defines the state path which must be used for state reading. All filesystem which are supported by Flink can be used here. |

> | operator.uid       | optional | (none)  | String                                        | Defines the operator UID which must be used for state reading (Can't be used together with UID hash). |

Reviewer: nits:
 Can't -> can't 
UID hash -> operator.uid.hash
same for line below

| operator.uid.hash  | optional | (none)  | String                                        | Defines the operator UID hash which must be used for state reading (Can't be used together with UID). |

> #### Connector options for column ‘#’

Reviewer: It would be worth describing what  column ‘#’ means.

Author: This is a generic pattern across SQL connectors without deep explanation. See datagen...

| Option                  | Required | Default | Type   | Description |
|-------------------------|----------|---------|--------|-------------|
| fields.#.state-name     | optional | (none)  | String | Overrides the state name which must be used for state reading. This can be useful when the state name contains characters which are not compliant with SQL column names. |

> | fields.#.state-type     | optional | (none)  | Enum Possible values: list, map, value | Defines the state type which must be used for state reading, including value, list and map. When It's not provided then it tries to be inferred from the SQL type (ARRAY=list, MAP=map, all others=value). |

Reviewer: nit : tries to be inferred -> tries to infer

Author: Changed.

> | fields.#.map-key-format | optional | (none)  | String | Defines the format class scheme for decoding map value key data (for ex. java.lang.Long). When It's not provided then it tries to be inferred from the SQL type (only primitive types supported). |

Reviewer: nit: It's -> it's
to be inferred -> to infer

| fields.#.value-format | optional | (none)  | String | Defines the format class scheme for decoding value data (for ex. java.lang.Long). When It's not provided then it tries to be inferred from the SQL type (only primitive types supported). |

### Default Data Type Mapping

> The state SQL connector is inferring the data type for primitive types when `fields.#.value-format` and `fields.#.map-key-format`

Reviewer: nit: is inferring -> infers

Author: Changed.

> are not defined. The following table shows the `Flink SQL type` -> `Java type` default mapping. If the mapping is not calculated properly

Reviewer: when can  "If the mapping is not calculated properly" occur?

Author: There is no 1to1 mapping between SQL->Java type.

> then it can be overridden with the two mentioned config parameters on a per column bases.

Reviewer: nit: bases -> basis

Author: Changed.

| Flink SQL type          | Java type                                                               |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CHAR / VARCHAR / STRING | java.lang.String                                                        |

> | BOOLEAN                 | boolean                                                                 |

Reviewer: I am curious if the content can be nullable - maybe Boolean would be more representative.

Author: boolean and Boolean can also be used.

| BINARY / VARBINARY      | byte[]                                                                  |
| DECIMAL                 | org.apache.flink.table.data.DecimalData                                 |
| TINYINT                 | byte                                                                    |
| SMALLINT                | short                                                                   |
| INTEGER                 | int                                                                     |
| BIGINT                  | long                                                                    |
| FLOAT                   | float                                                                   |
| DOUBLE                  | double                                                                  |

> | DATE                    | int                                                                     |

Reviewer: what about date time and time?

Author: When not listed then not supported.

| INTERVAL_YEAR_MONTH     | long                                                                    |
| INTERVAL_DAY_TIME       | long                                                                    |
| ARRAY                   | java.util.List                                                          |
| MAP                     | java.util.Map                                                           |
| ROW                     | java.util.List\<org.apache.flink.table.types.logical.RowType.RowField\> |

SHORTCUT: When a complex java class is defined in a column with STRING SQL type then the class instance

> `toString` method result will be the column value. This can be useful when only explanatory query needs to be

Reviewer: nit: 
This can be useful when only explanatory query needs to be developed in short time. ->
This can be useful when a quick explanatory query is required.
